Messaging-System Metric semantic conventions (#1077)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/messaging.md

| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent receiving a batch of messages from a queue/topic. |
| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.size` | ValueRecorder | messages | The number of messages in each batch if messages are consumed in batches. |
| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the batch received in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed batch size is reported. |
| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the batch received in bytes. |

## Process Message Metric Instruments

The following metric instruments SHOULD be captured for every message process operation.

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| `messaging.consumer.processed.messages` | Counter | messages | Total number of messages processed. |
| `messaging.consumer.processed.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent processing a message. |

> Test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

 
## Definitions

The [Trace Messaging Semantic Conventions Definitions](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md#definitions) is a resource for the messaging system terminology used in this document.

## Common Labels

The following labels **SHOULD** be applied to all messaging metric instruments.

<!-- semconv messaging -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

For messaging metric labels, one of the following sets of labels is RECOMMENDED (in order of usual preference unless for a particular messaging system it is known that some other set is preferable for some reason; all strings must be non-empty):

* `messaging.url`
* `net.peer.name`, `net.peer.port`, `net.peer.ip`, `net.transport`

## Send Message Metric Instruments

The following metric instruments SHOULD be captured for every message send operation
 unless the producer is batching. If the producer is batching some metrics may be
 omitted (e.g. `messaging.producer.duration` and `messaging.producer.compressed.bytes`).

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| `messaging.producer.messages` | Counter | messages | Sum of messages sent. |

> | `messaging.producer.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent sending a message. |

Reviewer 2: Is "time spent" just related to how long it took to produce a message onto a queue/topic, or is it more than that?

Author: Yes the duration is how long it took to produce a message onto a queue/topic. I will update that description to be more clear.

| `messaging.producer.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the payload sent in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed payload size is reported. |
| `messaging.producer.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the payload sent in bytes. |

### Send Batch Metric Instruments

When a message system uses batching the following metric instruments SHOULD
be captured for every batch send operation.

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|

> | `messaging.producer.batches` | Counter | batches | Sum of batches sent. |

Reviewer 2: Is this metric the accumulation of `messaging.producer.batch.size` for all occurrences?

If so, does it need to be captured separately?

Author: No, it is the count of batches sent. The sum of `messaging.producer.batch.size` would be the number of messages sent in those batches.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth adjusting the description to say "Total number of batches sent"?

To distinguish between summing what's in the batches, and the total number of batches.

be captured for every batch receive operation.

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| `messaging.consumer.batches` | Counter | batches | Sum of batches received. |
| `messaging.consumer.batch.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent receiving a batch. |
| `messaging.consumer.batch.size` | ValueRecorder | messages | The number of messages in each batch if messages are consumed in batches. |
| `messaging.consumer.batch.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the batch received in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed batch size is reported. |
| `messaging.consumer.batch.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the batch received in bytes. |

## Process Message Metric Instruments

The following metric instruments SHOULD be captured for every message process operation.

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|

> | `messaging.consumer.processed.messages` | Counter | messages | Sum of messages processed. |

Reviewer 2: The metric name might need altering, or `messaging.consumer.messages` needs altering to include "receive" in the name.

Otherwise, this metric could be implied to be a child of the other metric by virtue of the naming.

> # Semantic conventions for messaging system metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Semantic conventions for messaging system metric instruments
```

Or, more simply

```suggestion
# Semantic conventions for messaging systems
```

The conventions described in this section are specific to messaging systems. When interactions with messaging systems occur,
metric events about those operations will be generated and reported, providing insight into those
operations.

**Disclaimer:** These are initial messaging system metric instruments and labels, more may be added
 in the future.

## Definitions

The [Trace Messaging Semantic Conventions Definitions](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md#definitions) is a resource for the messaging system terminology used in this document.

## Common Labels

> The following labels **SHOULD** be applied to all messaging metric instruments.

Reviewer 3: No need for styling of normative statements. [Capitalization is all that is needed to convey meaning](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8174).

<!-- semconv metrics-messaging -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Example  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`messaging.destination`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | string | The message destination name. This might be equal to the span name but is required nevertheless. | `MyQueue`<br>`MyTopic` | Yes |

> | [`messaging.destination_kind`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | string enum | The kind of message destination | `queue` | Yes |

Reviewer 3: Can we duplicate the enum definition from the tracing semantic conventions, or add a note to make it explicit that these are defined to be the enum values from the trace semantic conventions?

Author: This seems to be a bug with the semconv generator. We're using the reference to the `destination_kind` already defined by trace messaging but the type members aren't being carried over with that reference to generate the note about the different values. For the trace messaging spec that note is created by the semconv generator. I'll file an issue with the generator, I'd rather not mix and match which things are copied and which are referenced.

Reviewer 3: We talked about this category of issues with the markdown generator this morning in the Specification SIG related to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/1162. Sounds like @jsuereth is going to open an issue to track a previously discussed solution to address this.

| [`messaging.protocol`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | string | The name of the transport protocol. | `AMQP`<br>`MQTT` | No |
| [`messaging.protocol_version`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | string | The version of the transport protocol. | `0.9.1` | No |

> | [`messaging.system`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | string | A string identifying the messaging system. | `kafka`<br>`rabbitmq`<br>`activemq` | Yes |

Reviewer 3: Can we add a note here saying these also be set in accordance with the trace semantics for this equivalent attribute?

Author: I'm not sure I follow, this is using a reference to exactly the trace semantics for this attribute.

| [`messaging.temp_destination`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | boolean | A boolean that is true if the message destination is temporary. |  | No |
| [`messaging.url`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md) | string | Connection string. | `tibjmsnaming://localhost:7222`<br>`https://queue.amazonaws.com/80398EXAMPLE/MyQueue` | No |
| [`net.peer.ip`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md) | string | Remote address of the peer (dotted decimal for IPv4 or [RFC5952](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5952) for IPv6) | `127.0.0.1` | No |
| [`net.peer.name`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md) | string | Remote hostname or similar, see note below. | `example.com` | No |
| [`net.peer.port`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md) | number | Remote port number. | `80`<br>`8080`<br>`443` | No |
| [`net.transport`](../../trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md) | string enum | Transport protocol used. See note below. | `IP.TCP` | No |
<!-- endsemconv -->

> For messaging metric labels, one of the following sets of labels is RECOMMENDED (in order of usual preference unless for a particular messaging system it is known that some other set is preferable for some reason; all strings must be non-empty):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For messaging system metric event labels, one of the following sets of labels is RECOMMENDED (in order of usual preference unless for a particular messaging system it is known that some other set is preferable for some reason; all strings must be non-empty):
```

* `messaging.url`
* `net.peer.name`, `net.peer.port`, `net.peer.ip`, `net.transport`

## Send Message Metric Instruments

> The following metric instruments SHOULD be captured for every message send operation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following metric instruments SHOULD be used to capture metric events for every message send operation
```

>  unless the producer is batching. If the producer is batching some metrics may be
>  omitted (e.g. `messaging.producer.duration` and `messaging.producer.compressed.bytes`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 unless the producer is batching. If the producer is batching some metric instruments MAY be
 omitted (e.g. `messaging.producer.duration` and `messaging.producer.compressed.bytes`).
```

Also, can we be explicit of which metrics may be omitted to ensure that the specification is not left to question? Would it be fair to say all the following `messaging.producer.*` metrics in this section MAY be omitted?

Author: Yeah I can specify that all the instruments in this section may be omitted during batching.

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| `messaging.producer.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent producing a message to a queue/topic. |

> | `messaging.producer.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the payload sent in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed payload size is reported. |

Reviewer 4: We should discuss whether the metrics ending in `.bytes` and `.size` should be Counters. I suspect all of them are more typically monitored as rates than as distributions, would you agree?

Author: I would agree that rate is a common use for analyzing produced/consumed bytes metrics but the distribution is also pretty interesting. For example it's useful to see what the max message size is for sizing buffers or for debugging which producer is sending large messages. I think the distribution of the batch size metrics help you understand how to tune your batching. For example if you are consistently seeing batches with the max number of messages allowed per batch you might want to raise that setting to increase throughput.

> | `messaging.producer.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the payload sent in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed payload size is reported. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `messaging.producer.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the payload sent in bytes. Also use this metric instrument if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed payload size is reported. |
```

| `messaging.producer.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the payload sent in bytes. |

### Send Batch Metric Instruments

When a message system uses batching the following metric instruments SHOULD

> be captured for every batch send operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be used to capture metric events for every batch send operation.
```

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|

> | `messaging.producer.batch.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent prodcing a batch of messages to a queue/topic. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `messaging.producer.batch.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent producing a batch of messages to a queue/topic. |
```

| `messaging.producer.batch.size` | ValueRecorder | messages | The number of messages in each batch if this producer/client is batching messages. |

> | `messaging.producer.batch.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the batch sent in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed batch size is reported. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `messaging.producer.batch.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the batch sent in bytes. Also use this metric instrument if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed batch size is reported. |
```

| `messaging.producer.batch.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the batch sent in bytes. |

## Receive Message Metric Instruments

> The following metric instruments SHOULD be captured for every message receive operation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following metric instruments SHOULD be used to capture metric events for every message receive operation
```

>  unless the consumer is receiving batches. If the consumer is receiving batches some metrics
>  may be omitted (e.g. `messaging.consumer.duration` and `messaging.consumer.compressed.bytes`).

Reviewer 3: Similarly, can we make this normative and explicit? 

```suggestion
 unless the consumer is receiving batches. If the consumer is receiving batches the some or all of the
 metric instruments in this section MAY be omitted.
```

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| `messaging.consumer.received.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent receiving a message from a queue/topic. |

> | `messaging.consumer.received.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the message received in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed payload size is reported. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `messaging.consumer.received.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the message received in bytes. Also use this metric instrument if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed payload size is reported. |
```

| `messaging.consumer.received.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the payload sent in bytes. |

### Receive Batch Metric Instruments

When a message system uses batching the following metric instruments SHOULD

> be captured for every batch receive operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be used to capture metric events for every batch receive operation.
```

| Name                 | Instrument    | Units        | Description |
|----------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.duration` | ValueRecorder | milliseconds | Time spent receiving a batch of messages from a queue/topic. |
| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.size` | ValueRecorder | messages | The number of messages in each batch if messages are consumed in batches. |

> | `messaging.consumer.received.batch.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the batch received in bytes. Also use this metric if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed batch size is reported. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The (uncompressed) size of the batch received in bytes. Also use this metric instrument if it is unknown whether the compressed or uncompressed batch size is reported. |
```

| `messaging.consumer.received.batch.compressed.bytes` | ValueRecorder | bytes | The compressed size of the batch received in bytes. |

## Process Message Metric Instruments

> The following metric instruments SHOULD be captured for every message process operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following metric instruments SHOULD be used to capture metric events for every message processing operation.
```
